yes you you've been looking uh in some
depth at this latest bizarre situation
with the use of uh that heavy sedative
uh
uh drug um
yeah there's a there's a great uh
a great movie armageddon america has to
send up some uh people to blow up
an asteroid that's coming in to destroy
the country and it turns out that our
astronauts are just not equipped to go
and drill on this uh asteroid and and so
they go to the they go to bruce willis
mining crew
and one of the uh one of the men and his
crew is this
giant guy who's really just huge and
he's sort of a wild guy there's many of
the many of these uh uh miners are who
who are digging around around the world
under bruce willis at least
and um
and one of the things that they find you
know this man can't go into space he's
taking uh
a uh a horse pill a horse sedative
ketamine
faith
fail
impressively failed one toxicology
analysis revealed ketamine that is a
very powerful sedative sedatives are
used all the time doctor well this one's
used on horses
some of these guys are pretty big and um
and bruce says well he's a big guy you
know he's a big guy
and it's so funny my colleagues now are
pushing ketamine for depression tell us
that's
that crazy story yeah so i i mean this
is
fascinating and again starts in your
crazy country
so
uh so so some people started opening
clinics and giving people injections of
iv ketamine
um
sometimes this was done in a sort of
psychotherapeutic way with the idea that
you know you'd have this sort of
mind-altered experience you'd do it with
in conjunction with a therapist i think
ecstasy and lsd are also being used this
way and that maybe that would you know
enable people to deal with
you know past trauma or get over some
anxiety
um so so that was the way it started and
then ketamine clinics start up where
people go back and they keep getting
regular sort of fixes
um
so uh so that became popular then jansen
developed um an inhaled a nasal
inhalation version of ketamine which
which is called s ketamine but it's just
as strong as ketamine in fact
and
people and the process with that is that
you go in and you inhale your ascetimen
three times a week and then you're
observed afterwards uh to make sure that
you're um
you know that you're physic you know
you're not physically in danger in any
way uh and then you're let out of the
clinic and then you come back again
um
so eschetamine has was recently licensed
by the fda
uh for this three weekly um
this three weekly mode of administration
and has just been considered by the
european medicine agency and the the uk
medicines agency
so normally the fda has to have two
positive trials but of the three trials
of acute
um treatment for uh treatment resistant
depression it's being marketed for of
those three trials only one was positive
the other two weren't positive at all so
then they had then they
they roped in a relapse prevention study
and they found some positive findings in
that so then they said okay we've got
our two studies although they don't
usually use a relapse prevention study
so they license it on the basis of this
one positive acute treatment study in
this relapse prevention study um
what they failed to say uh
they skated over the fact that two of
the studies were negative they also
failed to highlight that there was a
huge placebo response across all the
studies obviously if you're getting
people in um you know to do the slightly
odd procedure and then giving people
lots of attention and care afterwards
there's going to be a placebo effect
and and most worrying of all what they
skated over was that actually there were
a lot of potential worrying effects
associated with the ascetine so there
were several deaths in the ascetamine
group none in the placebo group that's
very i didn't know this
yeah very unusual joanna yeah yes
exactly in a drug trial it's it's almost
unheard of because you know
healthy people don't you
yes
so so there was a heart attack there was
a road traffic accident
um and a number of other incidents like
that and there were three suicides all
in the ascetamine group all after um
shortly after
cessation of the eschetomine so quite
probably associated with the
down that you get uh following the high
that you get with a with a recreational
drug like eschetamine
and i think the other thing it just
highlights to me is the way that
psychiatrists and researchers and drug
companies are able to do this sort of
double speak
so we know that ketamine is something
that makes people high you know gives
people it puts people into an altered
state that some people enjoy some people
don't enjoy it but some people enjoy it
clearly it's a you know recreation drug
um
but it's extraordinary how
these researchers are able to talk about
that high as an antidepressant effect
you know that they
which you would get with any you know if
you give someone heroin or cocaine and
you measure their you know you do a
depression score a couple of hours later
of course you're going to show an
antidepressant effect if that's how you
want to
talk about it
um
that is the same thing that the criminal
electroshock doctors do
i've read so many charts
in regard to electroshock treatment when
i've been product liability suits i've
been still involved in big product
liability suits here in the us
bowel practices
the patient after one or two treatments
tends to get euphoric from brain injury
it's brain damage euphoria
and the doctors write in the uh uh
always write a positive remark
in the chart such as mood elevated yes
yes
yes never do they write you for
artificial high euphoria brain damage we
better stop the treatment it's quite
sick
sometimes they talk about um tipping
people into mania don't they they call
it mania um yes which is another way of
sort of blaming the disease blaming the
condition and
and you know enabling yourself to ignore
the harmful effects of treatment the
other extraordinary thing about that
about ect and that euphoric effect which
i've seen i've seen several times in my
class as a doctor it definitely occurs i
don't think it occurs with everyone but
it definitely does occur
it tends to turn into apathy eventually
all brain damage
my experience usually leads to apathy
not a permanent eye yes yes absolutely
but as you say immediately what you get
is this state of euphoria but it's it's
a distinctive state of euphoria where
people are um
sort of silly and disinhibited in in you
know in in ways it isn't quite the same
as just you know if you gave someone a
big shot of cocaine or something it's
not just pure euphoria or heart
no there's more injury in it than mary
is going and exactly yeah yeah and so it
definitely occurs but it's very
difficult to find reference to it in the
literature isn't it in the published
literature right i found it enough so
that i've got it in in you know my first
book in 1979
on electroshock and in my papers but you
got
yeah yes absolutely yes and very very
little recent acknowledgement you have
to go back a long way don't you when
people were a bit more honest when they
brought these things in
well you know before i wrote my shock
book in 1979 they're very honest about
how people thought they were dying on
shock treatment people had rebirth
experiences and how people did it
because they hated themselves i mean
there's all kinds of stuff but once i
started quoting them they really cleaned
up their published act unfortunately
joanna can you say a little more first
you're educating me marvelously and the
audience about ketamine and
um
say some more about what is the what
what is ketamine nearest two with drugs
we're more familiar with so it's a
strange drug um
it's uh so it's used as an anaesthetic
and it's a muscle relaxant um but it it
also seems to have a slightly uh
stimulant some stimulant properties and
um
and
a slightly hallucinogenic quality to it
so people get this state
people it's referred to in the
literature as dissociation
do people get
sort of you know have this sort of out
of body experience yeah which is
considered in the dsm of course a dis
mental disorder yeah it's actually very
very common and
and a lot of people get it from stress
or yes yeah yes normally so it causes a
dissociative process yes um where you're
separate from yourself your body
yes the world around you
and people
um get sort of tunnel vision and uh
really get i mean a bit like the sort of
amphetamine
folk you know
the narrowing of focus with amphetamines
people get into it's called a k hole get
into this sort of they get this sort of
tunnel vision where they're just
focusing on
you know or not not really really
oblivious to their surroundings and
focusing on a bit of the floor or
something like that
um
that's very very very helpful strange
it's a strange drug um addictive i mean
we know it's addictive right yes yes it
i mean again again it's a bit like
stimulants i think not not not so much
like the opiates or benzodiazepines
so the come down is um the main feature
is this depression
crashing
crushing yes crushing of course yeah
it's a mixed sedative stimulant it's an
unusual drug very interesting i think
the the verdict now has to be and and
you'll see a good review of it in my
book psychiatric drug withdrawal that
all classes of psychiatric drugs
probably all classes of psychoactive
substances
will shrink brain tissue their
neurotoxins they poison their functions
and
one of the first things to go are
unfortunately our very highest centers
up to 60 million americans are estimated
to live with depression of them one in
three don't respond to available
treatments
enter this nasal spray in what's
considered the biggest breakthrough drug
in the battle against depression since
prozac the food and drug administration
this week approved the use of escadamine
with the potential to deliver nearly
immediate results a lot of the
antidepressants that we're used to such
as zoloft prozac alexa pro
takes four to six weeks to work
escadamine
works in a week
and that's very exciting
marketed under the name spravato the
spray is a derivative of the popular
drug ketamine popularly known in the
1980s as special k
that's right ketamine is now being
prescribed to patients in the united
states with treatment resistant
depression these are patients who have
tried all the different psychiatric
medications that their psychiatrist has
thrown at them and they still feel
depressed so what are they going to do
they're going to take ketamine
you might think that i would be
surprised by this but i'm really not
because i grew up in the 90s i saw this
transition from marijuana being seen as
a party drug to marijuana being seen as
a medicinal drug something that can be
prescribed to you by a doctor americans
everywhere are turning to cannabis
seeking relief from a wide range of
ailments
including veterans like sean worsley who
uses cannabis to treat his
post-traumatic stress disorder
caused by combat in iraq
shawn's medications for ptsd had
troubling side effects
so he got a medical cannabis card
cannabis at a low dose can help reduce
anxiety relax someone and individuals
who have ptsd that newly initiate
cannabis use
report it being life-changing so this is
partly not surprising to me because i've
seen how this cultural shift has
happened in the united states from
seeing cannabis as a party drug to now
having cannabis seen as a medicinal drug
but an additional reason why i am
cynical about this and why it's not
really surprising to me to find out that
the fda has approved ketamine for
treating depression is because i've been
reading a book lately called anatomy of
an epidemic i've gotten to learn about
the history of psychiatric medications
being prescribed in the united states
reading this book has made me realize
just how desperately people cling to
ideas about drugs that they really want
them to work for them they really want
there to be some solution some cure that
they can take in a pill form
when their problems cannot be solved
just by taking a pill millions of people
are willing to take psychiatric
medications with horrible side effects
many people are willing to take
medications that inflict brain damage on
them for years in order to help with
their depression so to me it's not
surprising that people are now turning
to ketamine to try to treat their
depression by reading some of the
personal accounts in this book of people
who have tried many different
psychiatric medications and have
struggled to come off the psychiatric
medications once they've started them
i've come to realize that i was actually
one of the lucky ones i was prescribed
lexipro i was prescribed an
antidepressant medication
and i was able to stop taking it i
haven't been through this drug mill that
so many people millions of people have
been through where they try one
medication and it doesn't work for them
they still feel depressed and they have
terrible side effects so the doctor
prescribes them either an additional
medication or a different medication to
try to find something that'll work for
you you just have to work to find the
right one you have to try different
medications and then one will work for
you one will click but what happens when
none of the psychiatric medications that
a psychiatrist can prescribe to you work
what happens when your depression is
still there when you feel
down still
ketamine
take ketamine this is at epidemic levels
this is a terrible problem and people
are still resorting to anything that
they can get their hands on to give
themselves brain damage it's just
insanity
just looking at some of the names on the
cover of this book klonopin lamigtal
zyprexa wellbutrin prozac xanax okay so
if these forms of brain damage haven't
worked for you
maybe you should try this other one
it's called ketamine
yeah
so you might have heard of ketamine some
people joke around that it's a horse
pill that it's a horse tranquilizer but
no no this drug it's been around a long
time but recently
things have changed they've had some new
discoveries that this can cure your
depression look to me i've heard this
all before i heard this with cannabis
when i was growing up cannabis i knew
was a party drug i knew it was something
that people took recreationally
then it turned into this medicinal drug
that people said would cure their
depression would cure what ailed them
these are the compromises that people
live with in order to convince
themselves that they're treating their
depression they'll put up with brain
damage they'll put up with horrible side
effects
just to feel better for a brief period
of time to feel something different they
might feel some euphoria in the short
term like dr bregen says that brain
injury can induce euphoria briefly but
then over time it will just lead to
apathy so if those claims that i heard
about cannabis helping with depression
and anxiety were true then why are
people now resorting to ketamine
cannabis was already the answer over the
last 20 years we've heard so much about
the positive benefits of medicinal
marijuana right so why do we need to
have medicinal ketamine
right probably because neither of those
drugs actually cure depression
so
what's next
if it's not cannabis
if it's not ketamine
what else is there
remember about 30 years ago we had the
first safe injection site here
and guess what it was
illegal
just like it's illegal to give out
safe drugs now
so you guys are following in the
footsteps of a great tradition where you
start doing something illegal and then
it becomes legal
[Applause]
if if dolph and vandu
with hardly any resources
can give away free and safe drugs
why can't governments
that have millions in their budgets
all of the public health folks
everyone who knows anything about drugs
all of the people who use drugs
they say we need a safe supply
not just a safe supply for a few hundred
people
but a safe supply for everyone who wants
us we are giving away more drugs in
these boxes are more drugs than these
limits we are still breaking the law
because you know what the law isn't
helping us we help us
[Applause]